there is no philosophy more
misrepresented and more misused on the
internet than skepticism and it's a
great shame because there is probably no
other philosophy more important for
daily life and public political
discourse than skepticism especially
right now especially in the 21st century
this video is doing something unusual
for my channel although there's a lot of
it going on on YouTube these days I'm
directly responding to someone who wrote
in to me in good faith someone who wrote
in as an ex vegan this is someone who
considers herself to have scientific
attitudes
she says somewhat vaguely that she
studied medical science in university I
would guess a particular profession like
nursing or something she doesn't specify
but you know obviously I'm gonna take
her at her word she studied she took
some courses but do medical science and
she thinks she did have completely
scientifically rational reasons to
return to eating meat dairy and eggs
animal products a non vegan diet the
crux of her message to me though and
again this comes back to both broader
and narrower questions of skepticism is
that in the middle of her long written
comment she says as soon as you have a
health problem any health problem
whatsoever all questions of ethics come
to an end they stop I'll quote her
directly quote the truth hit me right in
the face when it comes to ethics
question mark you know dot dot dot
ethics don't matter anymore when you
lose your health
I could hardly disagree more
suppose I were to tell you this is my
cell phone and this is my pair of
headphones hey let's do for you and you
know since I started plugging in these
headphones to this cell phone the
battery life got shorter and suppose you
said to me whoa whoa whoa whoa
well what what empirical evidence do you
have this I say none
what peer-reviewed scientific studies do
you have this none
what's the observational basis for this
let's invoke Karl poppers philosophy of
science how do you know what you think
you know oh I have no basis to stand on
whatsoever however this is extremely
plausible right this is a this is a very
large pair of headphones and they do not
have any battery they do not have any
internal source of electricity that are
on a solar panel right the only source
of electricity for these is the battery
inside the phone so oh gee I started
using a larger pair of headphones and it
seems as if the battery life got shorter
I I deal with a lot of really hostile
skepticism from people on the internet
when I do live streams when I talk to
people on discord the sort of thing and
it really is that stupid it really is
like someone throwing some of at your
face saying how can you possibly come to
this preposterous conclusion well there
are questions of plausibility and in the
other hand I speak to people who
identify as skeptics I had one memorable
debate with the guy who's actually a
medical doctor and nevertheless a
complete [ __ ] medical doctor at a very
very high opinion of his own
intelligence and I was pointing out to
him very real reasons to doubt the
medical efficacy of antidepressant drugs
SSRI drugs selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor drugs to get the to get the
type of drug correct and you know you're
able to point to really worrying facts
like well you know the original
hypothesis that these drugs were built
on was was that the brains the people
people who actually experienced
depression that they have low levels of
serotonin and that has been disproven so
that was the original hypothesis and
that was debunked so it was debunked in
two different ways one it was proven
that know empirically scientifically
their brains did not have low serotonin
levels and then
- when they did experiments inducing low
serotonin levels the actual symptoms
these people that were not depression
not at all they actually became very
aggressive very truculent and they had a
higher sex drive so they had aggressive
tendencies when they had low serotonin
low serotonin is not associate with
depression it's associate with a very
different set of behaviors people who
are depressed do not have low serotonin
levels that's that's the original
hypothesis that's been debunked then
further SSRIs there are drugs that do
the exact opposite which are called SSR
ease so instead of a serotonin inhibitor
sorry serotonin reuptake inhibitor you
get a serotonin reuptake inhibitor and
when you test it on depressed people it
has the same outcome has the same effect
so if I give you a drug that raises your
blood pressure and I have another drug
that lowers your blood pressure and they
have the same effect on your depression
that's a really strong indication that
this drug is not effectively treating
your depression it's a very very
difficult good and this guy's whole
response it was at this same level it
was like well uh show me the proof show
me the empirical evidence show me a
statistical study the true sets drugs
work and of course if you've seen on
this channel I have playlists I have
sources I have many videos and run
pretty deep and then some of the videos
I don't even talk I've just put together
clips of experts who devoted decades of
their life to this and they ended up
having to ask the guy questions like you
know look okay so this one source of
just directed you to he has all these
credentials university professor expert
it's done twenty years of research on
this like eight different peer-reviewed
publications do you think he's a fraud
like for what for what you to believe to
be possible this guy can't just be wrong
or mistaken this would have to be a
fraud on an enormous level involving
large-scale well-funded university
research projects the American
government
and 60 minutes the TV show in the United
States so skepticism it should be the
antidote to [ __ ] but it becomes the
pretext for [ __ ] and these two
examples as different as they are I
think really help to frame this
conversation I'm having right now with
uh with the next vegan now this ex vegan
does have her own YouTube channel UT au
jus Tia Maria who I believe is is polish
um okay j'tia you claim to have
scientific attitudes towards the problem
and yet you're the fundamental claim
you've made about your health in why you
stop being vegan is that you had hormone
problems you claim in year 3 your
hormones were completely out of balance
and you also say really vaguely that you
spent a lot of money on doctors and
tests right now this this suggests this
implies that you actually had a medical
diagnosis of a hormone problem but
that's not true is it good you you're
either lying or you're stating this in a
misleading manner intentionally when I
go to your video what you actually say
you actually say that during the last
few months on a vegan diet so you were
vegan for three years I believe yes
three years and in the last three months
you started to get acne and you
attributed the acne to hormonal problems
and you attributed the hormonal problems
to veganism you took a further step with
no evidence and no reasoning and no
plausible set of conditions for us would
be plausibility matters whether we're
talking about science or day-to-day
activities and problems like okay
plausibility matters you started eating
I believe chicken eggs and fish meat
right that was the first step you took
and you felt that miraculously your acne
was cured so therefore you created this
rationale in your mind looking back that
the the paucity of these foods the
absence of these foods in your diet was
the cause of a hormone problem to have
no empirical basis for you
evidence for you no scientific way it
wasn't you didn't get a blood test
showing you hormone problems right you
don't you don't have a sorry we just saw
a YouTube video from a young woman who
went through menopause at age 21 she has
hormone problems as a young woman she
she's a vegan and she just had you know
it's utterly changed your life is
utterly devastating she went in they
test their blood they said right away
whoa you have a serious bone problem she
had no period and what do you know she's
missing she was born with a condition
where basically her reproductive organs
don't work properly and it's game over
for her she assumed she'd be able to
have kids she never will be able to that
those are that's what hormone problems
are like they can show up in a blood
test and they can show up when the
doctors examine your ovaries normal with
x-ray or ultrasound whatever it's gonna
be that is not what happened to you
so I understand you you say you have
scientific attitudes you say you studied
medical science university to some
extent okay quote I studied in medical
university I am smart and reasonable and
yet I still could not win close quote
that's what you claim but this is
actually magical thinking you're engaged
in right acne there can be many causes
for acne acne does not mean hormonal
problems hormonal problems even if you
have them do not mean they're caused by
veganism and if your acne went away when
you ate eggs and fish okay this is not
plausible in this way right for that to
be plausible you would have to tell me
what Adam exists in fish and eggs what
chemical what molecule exists there that
does not exist in the vegan diet that
would have this effect on you now there
are some chemicals that exist in fish
and eggs like cholesterol is it
plausible is it well does it exclude
other possibilities that cholesterol is
the cure for acne would you claim that
is it plausible that cholesterol is the
cure for a quote unquote hormone
imbalance that you made up in your own
mind with
evidence just because you have acne and
could it be that there were other
factors
now again conversely if there were no
other factors I mean you know again I
don't know your situation maybe you were
taking the birth control pill and you
stopped taking the birth control pill I
can they have all kinds of reasons why
at one time your life you might have
acne and not others but you were vegan
for three years and you only had this
problem with acne during three months of
those three years so already in terms of
signed a if I said to you oh I was using
this for years and I had no problem and
then all of a sudden things change that
would be a different story you're
treating it as if there's only one
possible factor that could change your
health that could give you acne so they
don't receive so is it worth so look
guys the real moral of the story with
skepticism doesn't have to do with an
attitude towards technology doesn't have
to do with an attitude towards the
pharmaceutical industry of modern
medical science large institutions
government institutions and so forth the
fundamental lesson of skepticism is your
attitude toward yourself it's being
self-critical and self-aware step by
step what your assumptions are when
you're letting definitions slip when you
start it off with goal posts in one
position and then you change them as
time went on when you've engaged in
wish-fulfilling thinking self-justifying
thinking to me i see this most
hilariously when so-called skeptics talk
about free will and determinism and they
engage in all the same fallacies that
true believing monotheists believe in
it's just that their version of
determinism is not called god they've
made up a god with a lowercase letter G
they attribute all the same things to
this the ultimate point of skepticism is
not to doubt the things of this world it
is to doubt your own judgment your own
process of reasoning and through that
doubt to become keener keener in their
keener in your observation
the world teener in your observation of
human nature because the sad fact is we
only know and measure and understand
this world using human nature as our
instrument the point is not that man is
the measure of all things but that you
and I as fallible individuals are
inexorably the measurer